NFL Summary
Use the above Plotly figure to explore data generated from NFL box scores over the last 11 years. Click on elements in the legend to hide them. Double-click on an element in the legend to isolate it on the graph. Since scoring margins in NFL games tend to be multiples of 3 and 7, the graph has really small sample sizes at certain margins. Thus, the lines are much choppier than they are in other sports with more games and smaller point-scoring increments.
The solid lines track how often a team with the lead specified on the x-axis will go on to win the game. Take the solid blue line as an example. This represents the data after the first quarter of play. One point on the line is (7, 70%). This means that teams who were up by 7 points at the end of the first quarter went on to win the game 70% of the time. The solid green line represents data after the third quarter of play. This line indicates that teams who were up by 7 after the third quarter went on to win the game 79% of the time. As expected, a lead closer to the end of the game is more indicative of the eventual winner than a lead earlier in the game. This is why the solid line curves move up with every quarter. Green (Q3) is generally above orange (Q2), which is generally above blue (Q1).
The shaded areas indicate what share of games have the specified margin of victory at the end of each quarter. Take the shaded blue area as an example. The solid lines tells us that teams up by 7 after the first quarter go on to win 70% of the time. The shaded blue area shows us that 24% of games have a scoring margin of 7 after the first quarter (716/2939). As the game progresses, the successive blue (Q1), orange (Q2), and green (Q3) shaded distributions show that larger and larger scoring margins become more common. It should be expected that teams can build up bigger leads the longer the game goes on. For example, only twice have teams built up a 24-point lead in the first quarter. Compare that with 40 and 56 24-point lead occurrences after the second and third quarters, respectively. The shaded pink distribution shows the distribution of final scoring margins at the end of all games. The mode is a 3-point victory for the winning team (14% of games).
The final element of the plot is what I am calling Decidedness. This is meant to indicate how "decided" an average game is after each quarter. The dashed blue line indicates that on average, after the end of the first quarter, one team will be in a position where they are expected to win 66% of the time. It is calculated as a weighted average of win probability weighted by number of occurrences of each margin. It is effectively a combination of the solid line and the shaded distribution of the same color. As expected, as we move from the blue (Q1), to orange (Q2), to green (Q3) dashed lines, the Decidedness increases. After three quarters, it makes sense that games have become more "decided" (81%). Teams that are winning will be able to build out bigger leads as the game goes on and they become even more likely to win as their leads grow.