NHL Summary
Use the above Plotly figure to explore data generated from NHL box scores over the last 12 years. Click on elements in the legend to hide them. Double-click on an element in the legend to isolate it on the graph.
The solid lines track how often a team with the lead specified on the x-axis will go on to win the game. Take the solid blue line as an example. This represents the data after the first period of play. One point on the line is (2, 84%). This means that teams who were up by 2 points at the end of the first period went on to win the game 84% of the time. The solid orange line represents data after the second period of play. This line indicates that teams who were up by 2 after the second period went on to win the game 92% of the time. As expected, a lead closer to the end of the game is more indicative of the eventual winner than a lead earlier in the game. This is why the solid line curves move up blue (P1) to orange (P2).
The shaded areas indicate what share of games have the specified margin of victory at the end of each period. Take the shaded blue area as an example. The solid lines tells us that teams up by 2 after the first period go on to win 84% of the time. The shaded blue area shows us that 16% of games have a scoring margin of 2 after the first period (2130/13510). As the game progresses, the successive blue (P1) and orange (P2) shaded distributions show that larger and larger scoring margins become more common. It should be expected that teams can build up bigger leads the longer the game goes on. For example, only once has a team built up a 6-goal lead in the first period. Compare that with 53 6-goal lead occurrences after the second period. The shaded pink distribution shows the distribution of final scoring margins at the end of all games. The mode is a 1-goal victory for the winning team (45% of games). This makes sense because every game that goes to overtime (23% of games) will end up as a 1-goal game due to the sudden-death nature of hockey.
The final element of the plot is what I am calling Decidedness. This is meant to indicate how "decided" an average game is after each period. The dashed blue line indicates that on average, after the end of the first period, one team will be in a position where they are expected to win 66% of the time. It is calculated as a weighted average of win probability weighted by number of occurrences of each margin. It is effectively a combination of the solid line and the shaded distribution of the same color. As expected, as we move from the blue (P1) to orange (P2) dashed lines, the Decidedness increases. After two periods, it makes sense that games have become more "decided" (77%). Teams that are winning will be able to build out bigger leads as the game goes on and they become even more likely to win as their leads grow. 